a lot of work in a lifetime came to the
conclusion about five years ago no six
or seven years ago that uh whatever I
done and by inference
whenever anybody else had done was
insufficient if we're going to look at
something like a sixth extinction if
we're going to look at heatwave
so I thought I'd show you the best work
we ever did and explain why it's not
good enough and then what I think we
want to be doing or some of us ought to
be doing and why finally it turns out
that the glaciers are our best teacher
we got telephone calls from Holland we
asked what's the matter why do you keep
calling us they said well we have a
place where we have the green heart and
it's about 800 square mile of kilometers
and around it our Veron start the great
cities through the Amsterdam Rotterdam
then hog it all Utrecht and there's
about six hundred six million people
there and they got 13 villages in there
in the 800 square kilometers and the 800
square kilometers they look like this is
the whole history of Holland windmills
all that stuff you know but stuff you
don't know and the stuff you don't know
is it formed the first or the basis for
democracy itself as the process of
pumping required the formation of a
simple demo Democratic Association and
so
I got told that the Planning Group for
that six hundred thousand houses had to
be built there and that thousand about
two hundred and thirty billion dollar
economic engine and it was the only
place to do it and sadly that
development would extract the whole
history of place you know some everybody
talks about extraction but we forget
about extracting cultures and language
and this would sure do it and so the
planning group called the southern
Africa over maybe do something so I met
with people in Parliament and they said
they had given us ten books each book
was a plan to solve the green heart
problem
each book was a local expert each book
flopped each book was three or four
months work each book costs a couple
hundred thousand dollars maybe more so
if he added all up it was a mess so we
said we'll solve her green heart problem
I was um exaggerating there so the
congressman said well what makes you
think you can do it and we said well you
can't look at these ten books you wasted
a million they have dollars on it so far
and we're much cheaper than that in fact
we're cheap date
so we shook hands and made a verbal
contract and agree to save the green
heart of Holland part of our contracts
are not normal contracts because we told
them that the green heart itself was our
client not them and that's we were going
to take direction from not them if they
didn't like it would go home
and they liked it alright so we didn't
go home so we made them an insulation on
the insulation had a floor and the floor
was thought was in Delft tile the hole
Oh a landscape of Holland and people
could everybody could see their house
and everybody could see their proposal
on and grandmas brought their kids
around it we did it's a way of
democratizing information when you leave
work at that scale it's about twenty
four feet across
also this work was in something called
The Jerusalem Chapel that meant we were
privileged Jesus was looking down on us
truly odd experience so um the first
thing we did was made a map of Holland
backward and we drew in three hundred
thousand houses that's the dark drawing
and the planners got miffed at us and
they said newspapers and all that's 8
foot square and why'd you do that
well you're planning your country
backwards you're thinking backwards you
didn't even look at your whole landscape
and you're about to drop your history
into history for what and also all the
money that you put in there will go to
international developers so next thing
that happened was they said well if
that's wrong what's right said what's
right is filled at the biodiversity ring
around the center if you build a
biodiversity ring it will fill up with
water
find its own ecosystem become a water
purification system purify about 60
million cubic meters a year and pay for
your whole operation at of course about
$1 a cubic metre for good water so over
law overturn you know see do a bond
issue and they said what the green
Wiggles for they call them the Wiggles
and the green Wiggles that you see going
out is our critique of planning in
general
what it is what they are are are narrow
parks between all the cities Delft
Amsterdam Harlem at all and what that
does is as follows each one of those
parks ends up in an ecologically
interesting area so that biodiversity
can travel back and forth but much more
important
it keeps the cities from bleeding into
one another
each city is historic entity each city
was once a city state each city was
going to lose its identity along with
all the little cities in the center all
for what and so the dots are pretty good
to work with I must say I actually
advise working there because they say
what they will do when then they do it
but God forbid you don't one time for
instance our text was due on a Friday
and our project manager a 23 year old
sociology student said why isn't ready I
said be ready on Monday you said Friday
so we were never late again so it's kind
of fun to work for so finally we go into
well where are you going to put six
hundred thousand houses we said you
certain you need six hundred thousand
houses they said where are you going to
put six hundred thousand houses with
infrastructure and schools and fire
departments and we'll spend the 230
billion to do it but where are you going
to put it well we had a team when we go
someplace we asked for a team because we
can't do car trying to work without a
bunch of smart locals working with you
people grew up there and who loved the
place and you get to like it
they sent me to greens heart school for
about two months driving all around so
there was no part of this place I didn't
see well now one of our team was a
really smart Landscape Architect lady
she was I'm just ready to graduate
and so I pulled her aside to look you
have an unlimited budget go out and find
me where you can put six hundred
thousand houses outside of the green
heart but inside of the city the
surround cities so about fifteen hundred
dollars later about that amount of time
later about a month later she shows up
with this drawing she proves that six
hundred thousand houses can be put as
infill around the cities without
violating the architectural properties
without them bleeding into one another
and without losing their history so um
this wins the day what is winning the
day me the environmental industry takes
it are the environmental ministry takes
it all are the big answered him I guess
it would be called the Financial Times
reviews it two hundred and thirty
billion dollars is now going to be spun
back into the country local architecture
will be honored a local work would be
there and maybe you don't need six
hundred thousand houses but we also
found the space to put seven hundred
thousand dollars so that's how we work
there's redundancy and systems and what
they hadn't done was what we did hold it
that's the green heart without it and
that's an engineering drawing which
shows each field each fields is below
sea level each field has dikes or as a
lake a little stream around it you pump
water out of so that an engineering
company could build our work from this
drawing
we're not engineers but we know enough
to do such a thing and so what this we
call the icon what this icon showed us
was that the planners weren't looking at
their own terrain
they were looking at their prejudices
they were looking at the long-held
belief there's not enough room in our
country to build and the answer was sure
there is and - everybody's advantage so
well we're there about a week and we'll
get a F this is up and getting all kinds
of praise and on election happens the
right wing moves in the Minister of the
Environment changes our work is put on
the back show it suggested we should go
home quickly which we did do oh one last
thing if you look at this you would so
fine Jilla will dots their houses you
would find if you follow this plan you
have 160 running kilometres of park land
to build against and who comes late to
these buildings the immigrants the
poorer people and so all of a sudden
park lands were available when they
never would have be available before and
the kind of compressed slum will type
stuff can't happen by virtue of the way
the design takes place and this is what
saved by the way it's stunning it's
their Central Park it's their farm it's
their history to be and it is a joyous
thing well at any rate we're kicked out
and then five years later the Ministry
of Environment comes across the spot
says the bad guys are voted out you're
voted in withdraw your plan so but we're
not going to do your Wiggles we're going
to make parks but the biodiversity ring
itself we can do better than you which
is we can run biodiversity up and down
the rivers and the river edges and
therefore our solutions in advance of
yours and that's why we do what we call
open-ended design
the open-ended thing is the principal is
at work
we don't insist that you follow our
design we do insist that you follow the
principle and if you can out think us
terrific effort over a small group time
passes new information comes in and so
the three principles we laid on the
table were biodiversity needs to be
continuous cultural diversity needs to
be framed and the whole system has to be
seen as yin-yang if you plan one part of
it then you kind of look at its
relationship and what it does to every
other part and once you do that you'll
be okay and as far as we can tell they
are now about five years after that
after all this is done twenty-five years
ago about five years after that this
appears the green heart suddenly shows
up as one of the seven most valuable
places in northwest Europe and should be
saved at all costs accorded the EU who
knew this is what we call unintended
circumstances we find that when we
design like this and we work like this
and we create an an alternate urban
narrative and the thing operates in art
time and art scale as well as urban time
and urban scale the narrative happens
and embeds itself into the culture and
it goes to work for you and it changes
your work and it didn't change our work
for worse it changes for better so
that's so ah now this is a drawing from
the green heart studio in 1994 they
snitched it it's almost an exact copy
the best part of working when you work
at the scale we do is you pay your idea
stays but this doesn't say Harrison
studio thus you fade into anonymity the
larger your work the more anonymous you
need to accept becoming it's enough for
us to be in the history books which we
are
so why do I say it's insufficient to
hell it will work it's as follows
kantham tell me how the time this week
if I'm talking to however I've got about
20 minutes okay
I tend to ramble so ah why would I
dismiss this work and 40 years work
before it
I don't dismiss it's pretty good but you
see a cyst extinction is upon us come
this becomes clear to us somewhere
around eight nine years ago and systems
breakdown is upon us
that is to say think about how the life
web works the light web works by niches
and each niche is a give-and-take system
if you take more from such a system than
you give in due course it has energy
after that if you take much too much you
have systems collapse it doesn't have
enough energy to to keep up to keep
itself so that's what we're doing all of
our systems are are extracted from but
we have not invented are designed to a
point and this is a my argument with the
last designer to one we haven't and
pushed our design to a point where the
act of taking is the act of giving all
living things do this
the amoeba does it takes in the like the
amoeba has intelligence how do we know
it has intelligence its living what does
that mean means that it takes stuff into
itself processes and gives it out that's
called the dissipative structure they
things dissipate stop dissipating you
stop living so we have to we came to
conclusion we stopped we better start
doing work that gives back as much as it
takes
I'll start to find ways to do that or to
mediate at great scale so we invented a
work we invented a new way of working
the university built us a little
nonprofit and it's called uh and and our
way of working is for the force Missoula
and the force majeure describes the
forces unleashed by the continuing rise
in the average temperatures of Earth's
climate systems generated by vast
industrial thump processes of resource
extraction and carbon dioxide production
nowhere do we get back and the
technology that says we can fix it part
by part is absurd are we going to for
instance invent something that will pull
some core co2 out of the air so we can
continue then we're going to invent
something it's going to pull a siddha T
out of the ocean so that it can take co2
in and that the eCos is the the the
ecosystem in the thermocline doesn't
collapse are we going to feed back into
the great forests we've removed so that
they can continue to process a topsoil
do props are whole create wetherhold
also stuff in the ground for water in
the ground are we going to do that now
we don't what happens is our design
process is now Thank You Bucky fuller
are making much more efficient the way
we proceed with things but the way we
proceed with things does not give back
as much as it takes the way we proceed
with things now has the benefit of
taking less and less more and more
efficiently and that's inefficient or
we begin with the center for the Force
Majeure it's about it's like an oncoming
storm front it's a fluid frontier a
frontier of exponentially increasing
heat moving across a planet and a
warming of water advancing on all lands
and a frontier of extinctions touching
to lives so the question we ask in our
research is are there counter forces
available well I don't know we do three
kinds of work one at large scale one at
intimate scale and one on governance
that is can we invent governance forms
that themselves become niches in the
life web itself where the form of
governance gives back into the web as
much as it takes although a different
form since it will have been processed
okay our first one were planning design
it says well you know like I'm feeling
uncomfortable saying design all the time
in truth we're artists okay so our first
way of making art we begin with a
guiding metaphor it says only fools pick
a fight with the oceans the forests the
topsoil the atmosphere itself wise folk
dance with the undetermined Asiya pond
now what is that Oh me well it's our
counter argument to sustainability
sustainability suggests that you can
stop something and keep it like it is
with every molecule and movement that
and change continuing that's virtually
impossible
it's a developer's way of getting away
with stuff in my opinion what we really
need to be thinking about as I was
talking to David McConnell hoping for is
dropping the idea of
sustainability and switching to a notion
of continuing how do we continue well we
continue by becoming part of the life
web itself well I'll show you a couple
of works how's my thumb oh good we did
this with the European Union the German
government and five museums one in
Holland one in France and one in Germany
and its basic course was around six
hundred thousand dollars but this is the
sick the fifth version of it the first
version filled up a Museum of about
350,000 square feet okay in this case we
note see the arrows they say that Europe
a drought is moving from Portugal and
Turkey even up to the center and we'll
stop pretty close to Germany to mid
Europe now what can we understand
presently get this thing presently the
the Browns represent 2.3 million square
kilometers a farm land mostly Multan
monoculture there's so many rivers there
because we privilege them over the over
the roads therefore the maps dishonest
but fun the greens are mostly high
ground forests mostly monoculture and
the yellows are about 340 square
kilometers of pasture lands also over
fertilized with nitrogen air force
ecologically simplifies so
to do simply get right so incidentally
we may have not set an earlier map which
showed that the waters rose a few meters
they'd lose about oh ten thousand
fifteen thousand square miles and about
twenty million people that have to move
up but so 50 years from now Europe's
looking at something like this they're
going to lose about a third of their
ability to produce food and they're
going to lose about five ten percent of
the land fifty seventy what your and
what is anybody doing about this
well they're funding extra fishing
fleets to make more money fishing
they're funding more clever ways of
farming to draw more off the land but
they're really fighting for more jobs we
spent a lot of time in Brussels met some
of the high-level folk and they said the
mock recei doesn't work anybody can stop
you from doing anything so democracy
doesn't work what will work well I think
this might work um there right there is
something that what that existed in
Portugal a dry landscape in Portugal
about thirty years ago some people went
there and made a water-retention
landscape now what's a water-retention
landscape go back to the peninsula and
yes what all these farmers do over a
thousand years they flattened the land
they tipped it slightly so waters
withdraw go off slowly they space they
soak in but they wouldn't stay long
enough for roots to rot well with no
water to run off and no water therefore
no place to collect the water what to do
so our proposal is as follows
first of all we calculate it out to be a
trillion dollar proposal roughly the
cost of a bush war which is the kind of
monies we're going to have to start
spending to a counter to create the
counter forces necessary well what we
would what we require is inspired
hydrologists and geographers to redesign
the land so that first to locate all the
aquifers which we have then to retic the
land so that when it rains heavily which
it will those waters run to the low
spots for Aquifer recharge at which
point then that land would turn not into
a uniform farm it would turn into what
amounted to be a multitude of oases now
what would that mean that would mean
that farming would have to change
because when it rained a lot you could
farm a lot when it rained a little you
formed was each of these oases or low
parts have a wetland have species
surviving in them have biodiversity and
the like and at the same time a new kind
of community has to form a much more
collaborative cooperative community to
run these things and to and to be
inventive with it
so with that in mind then one would
maybe return two thirds of the amount of
foods that you you once had from from
that kind of farming from industrial
farming but you would probably produce
enough to reduce or make unlikely a
civil collapse because I think you look
at it revolution and civil collapse with
the rich do well the middle upper middle
class do sort of okay the lower plus and
poor people do terribly and you have a
disrupted social order so I think this
calls for reinventing to a degree
certain kinds of social
order and letting the ecology be your
teacher
so that would be Peninsular Europe a
tough call I must say sent it off to the
EU when they said we're too busy but one
of our works our gala miracle opened in
Germany it's danger meadows and so if we
get funded appropriately and we started
to need funding people now then I think
we can get to Merkel and get this opened
up and put together the team that starts
making it because this needs to be put
in place over the next 25 years so that
would be a large-scale force majeure
work an exhibition was planned and we
were asked what we would do for the bays
of San Francisco and so we proposed that
a paper was more interesting to see what
a phase of San Francisco would do to us
if it rose about three meters horizon
about three meters oh here's a here's a
one of the nice ideas as if you want to
save yourself from flood there you have
to build a hundred and sixty mile long
dike 4x billions of dollars I guess it's
a billion a mile maybe more and you
better hope that the sea only raises
three or four meters because you'll get
overtype by overtop by the high winds
and tides so so that's so what does
every Cisco folk doing they run into
Holland to find good dive makers so what
are we doing now okay here's what it
looks like with a 1 meter rise there's
what it looks like with a 2 meter rose
there's what it looks like with a 3
meter rods that's what it looks like
with a 5 meter rise 5 6 meters
so how do you make a virtue of such a
thing
well the Central Valley of California
has been abused by the Army Corps of
Engineers and our Congress and everybody
else as everybody knows for the last 75
years when they kick the Japanese truck
farmers out who knew how to farm and
know how to live in that context was a
terrible thing to do and then all of a
sudden you couldn't farm unless you have
less occur than a couple thousand acres
and all of a sudden because all the
rivers were dammed water costs twenty
five dollars a million gallons two
million gallons is what you needed to
grow rice in the desert that's a six
acre feet an acre foot is 326,000
gallons three acre feets roughly a
million so what we did was we wrecked
our rivers we cut down all the trees on
top that would have made for the safety
of the rivers then we made our rivers
into sort of spigots and water and then
and and water tubes and we sent and
fertilized this whole land now it's not
working so well droughts screwed us up
just rained enough to hold that back for
a few years but it'll come back so
what's so interesting about an estuary a
lagoon well so happens we study them and
if you look at a highly productive
estuary a lagoon with a temperature
raised of six or seven degrees now so
it's warm water and with fresh water
flowing in from all those rivers off the
Sierra Nevada and some of those dams
pulled away because they are they're
stuffed full of sand and don't work so
well anymore well an estuary Lagoon if
properly managed is the most fertile
production of any place on the planet
this would produce approximately a
thousand pounds of food wet wait a year
in a low-intensity aquaculture system
which maintains its biodiversity but you
would harvest differ
crops every year because you would
encourage the growth by breathing the
wastes the purified wastes of the city
of San Francisco into this which would
push the production a little bit high
and you harvest the overproduction
thus the harvest preserves the system
the harvest does not destroy the system
then you start all over again and it's
different kind of farming so the farmer
becomes the preserver as well as the
harvester the conserving really and so
it's these kinds of things that design
has to lead us into in fact art and
storytelling lead us here and metaphor
leaves us leads us here and these kind
of narratives have to build themselves
back into the culture so that looks
normal right now irrigated farming looks
normal to people doesn't look normal to
me look crazy but there you have it
pretty neat looking I was totally
surprised when our met mount makers came
up with this so
well we got looked we did a piece
how much smile is my time how much okay
we did a piece and the Berkeley Research
Station 9,000 acres HN up near Lake
Tahoe about ten miles off on 89 and what
we did was this we said it's going to
get seven degrees hotter up here what's
going with and so we did what we call a
future garden we did a big search found
the twenty most resilient species there
based on the idea that any place that's
already lived through a heat wave and
been seven degrees warmer in its history
has the genetic resort sources to do it
again if you help it along
we selected twenty five twenty species
we grew them and after three years which
woman I'll show you the piece later
after three years twenty five percent
live that showed so it showed we were
right meanwhile we got fire in the West
and the forest burning because of bad
harvesting and they had to lumbered work
and you all know the story and jerry
brown's in a snit about it and he's
correct to be so so our group whoops not
going well look at that that must be too
heavy so this is the story with this
what we the bed harvesting generated
great loss and gret generated this kind
of tree structure tall thin
overproduction of trees that situation
set up the conditions for a crown fire
you all know buck mountain fires
oops what's happening
so in SE chen 2,000 acres were cleared
so that there are only 60 or 70 trees
per acre if that's done that harvesting
the wood becomes useful one way but that
kind of harvesting leaves only 60 or 70
trees per acre and sets up the
conditions for only ground fires doesn't
cost much but California would have to
spend 15 billion dollars to clear off 15
million acres this way in order to save
itself 30 billion dollars and it's
forests because that's caused a billion
and a half a year to do far to save them
from fire so that's what it looks like
when it's cleared what is this is
amazing that's what comes back
biodiverse healthy and then you have
control burning like the the early folk
did like the indigenous folk did and
still do and that means that lots of
seeds can germinate and you don't have a
crown fire and that fire brings new
sprouts which brings new species back in
and so on so that's what saving the West
is about except
you harvest twice once the good would
you sorts called sewer logs and twice
this kind of wood which turns into bored
and I don't know what to do this is
everything here it turns into this wood
and now you now you got the corker if I
get it turns into this look at the
statistics a cubic meter of wood in a
building it effectively sequester's a
ton of co2 a 20-story wood building
would sequester 3,100 tons of carbon or
hold it store it and save 1,200 tons of
the co2 from emitted by the construction
of concrete so this building here pulls
4300 tons of co2 out of the atmosphere
so we proposed the Jerry Brown that we
really need to save our forests because
if you harvest them the way you harvest
little blue lagoons and so on the act of
harvesting preserves the system the act
of harvesting in hundred thousand acre
groupings makes four new kinds of
communities and at the same time science
and at the same time if you did this for
the cities of simple of but if
government buildings and then cities you
would be saving gigatonnes of carbon
what does this mean well a Gigot on a
carbon drops the carbon count one point
so we're at three third for 10 now about
parts per million well if you drop 10
Giga tons you drop it to 4 or 400 parts
per million from 410 so we have to think
about that way but at the same time we
would have a profitable industry of
but even more important sequestering
carbon this way and preserving the
forest that way enhances biodiversity if
we are doing systems that have enhance
and save and help file diversity become
more so we are reducing the power of the
of the extension curve so that's what we
mean by a virtuous operation so a grand
synthesis needs to be designed put on
the ground many parts are in place
industry knowledge science with the
exception of a viable market yet all are
separate each happening in a different
place we propose a new category entitled
whole system site where grand synthesis
can occur a guiding metaphor appears
assisting at application is
collaboration with nature well we're
working with stuff on the ground as well
is a lot of despair what the problems ok
what's going to do well this is called
the future God invented at first in 95
at the constant outselling Salah and
bond when we're doing a work of the
endangered meadows what it does what it
suggests it closes a question what's
bond going to look like if it drops if
it the temperature rises three degrees
centigrade well turns out that some
paleo botanical research was done for us
and the dawn redwood was there about
three million years ago so maybe three
and a half and so here's what we did we
invented this garden and said well the
constant will be arrays in temperature
the end constant will be how much water
you're going to have um if the if the
temperature rises is going to be more
water in the air therefore more like for
rain but more likely for drought as well
so let's plan both warmer and drier
and this worked let's something out you
know it shows you that you first we
planted it and said we made the planting
such that human beings could eat the
stuff but so could other animals much
like the Native Americans did here then
we are we put warning signals you know
each one of those little green houses is
where our proposal doesn't work like the
ozone comes too heavy like the inside
the disturbance from insects
wrecks the environment like the virus
comes and then we do our humorous piece
we got a piece from the ice core and we
set a Buddha statue on it and put a
blanket around it go over the shivering
Buddha because you see there's some
chance we're going to get an ice age
the chance is low but there but it
exists actually very low so that's wood
so that was so that's what a future
garden would be like but we didn't know
it on the ground in this age head in
which I just showed you the forest there
we got I guess a quarter of a million
grant from Annenberg and and we chose
five sites at five altitudes
we grew 12,000 plants that were selected
for not they're fragile miss we've got
to save them but for their hardiness you
can't kill them and we planted at
different altitudes and this is Brett
Hall our botanist he does as a species
count there and that's when we discover
that on all altitudes 25% live and we
find that where the Sun is brightest
more live and where that's where they're
shaded by trees less live so we didn't
know that and other things showed up as
well but what that says is here's the
native
American team that helped us that Steven
wise man he's trying to save the culture
there and then another one comes up for
the we get three domes at the Arboretum
where we will grow the species again at
7:00 or degrees Fahrenheit warmer with
three variations in water and what's the
idea here the idea here is that local
groups with local botanical knowledge
can make a future garden for their place
can create the future of scaffolding for
a future plant-based echo system as died
out happens instead of waiting for the I
guess you would call the migration of
species which are very hard to do by
virtue of their being out of you know
they're too few and there's too much
blockage and there's too much
infrastructure and so as species died
out it's possible to create a return
that's faster it speeds it up the person
performing dawn who is talking about
speeding up design has the same is the
same notion and she's right so that's
what looks like on the ground we've
gotten enough money to rehab the domes
and we're doing our species searches
right now I'll do this quickly we also
have a site on the on the edge of the
Tibetan Plateau that poses the question
what will grow in four hundred thousand
acres of the Sichuan province we land at
that Airport we head down the mem River
to your left we come to site one it's
really sight to those we choose it
that's like that's the landscape
that's where that's where we'll do our
planting our botanist will be selecting
species from the Mims River which runs
right by it arm almost within the next
two months would you if they drop about
4,000 feet it's about six or seven
degrees warmer there and ultimately
drier and wetter and therefore they'll
start to grow the future of that whole
valley in this site and we'll see how it
works that's us
I'm 84 years old so insurance was taken
on me to make sure a hospital plane
could fly me back because I was ten
thousand thirteen thousand feet up but
it turns out to be fine
Tanya's on the right it's a stunning
landscape the Tibetan family gets what
we're doing that's bought into the whole
thing and they'll and they'll guard it
the last thing that we do when I'll stay
on it very briefly is governance we're
done unless governance changes okay
what do we mean by changing governance
well you have to go back to how the life
web works it's three and a half billion
years old it's learned a lot the first
thing it's learned the thing that's
learned most about is that it's formed
its self forming self organizing self
knowing and you can imagine it has a
voice of its own so as artists we
imagine it's a it's three and a half
billion years old and it's saying to the
human race which is only three and a
half million years one-tenth of one
percent of its existence you're about to
end my life as I know it
um and what we are doing is getting that
3.5 billion year entity to start to
advise us some of the things that we're
coming up with is first working at the
scale you saw in Peninsula Europe or
Tibet but second is to find a way to
start finding a way that everything we
do everything we take gives back not an
equal measure
but in equal energy level measure and so
that's hard to do
oh but if we don't do it then any system
we take things from we weaken and we do
so knowingly and we are responsible and
so the most recent effort that we're
making is putting together a new
governance roundtable we just got it
funded to begin to think our way into
what we would call life web governance
thank you
[Applause]